

Besozzi2012 - Oscillatory regimes in the Ras/cAMP/PKA pathway in S.cerevisiae

Mechanistic model of the Ras/cAMP/PKA in yeast S.cerevisiae. The Ras/cAMP/PKA
pathway plays a major role in the regulation of metabolism, stress resistance
and cell cycle progress and is tightly regulated by multiple feedback loops,
exerted by the protein kinase A (PKA). This model investigates the dynamics of
the second messenger cAMP on Ras/cAMP/PKA pathway, to determine the effects of
the feedback mechanisms on establising stable oscillatory regimes.

The model has been defined according to the stochastic formulation of chemical
kinetics [[Gillespie DT,
1977]](http://identifiers.org/doi/10.1021/j100540a008) , which requires to
specify the set of molecular species occurring in the pathway and their
respective interactions, formally described as a set of biochemical reactions.

The volume considered for this system is 30fL; this value can be used to
convert the model into the deterministic formulation.

This model is described in the article:

[The role of feedback control mechanisms on the establishment of oscillatory
regimes in the Ras/cAMP/PKA pathway in S.
cerevisiae.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/22818197)

Besozzi D, Cazzaniga P, Pescini D, Mauri G, Colombo S, Martegani E.

EURASIP J Bioinform Syst Biol. 2012 Jul 20;2012(1):10.

Abstract:

In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the Ras/cAMP/PKA pathway is involved in
the regulation of cell growth and proliferation in response to nutritional
sensing and stress conditions. The pathway is tightly regulated by multiple
feedback loops, exerted by the protein kinase A (PKA) on a few pivotal
components of the pathway. In this article, we investigate the dynamics of the
second messenger cAMP by performing stochastic simulations and parameter sweep
analysis of a mechanistic model of the Ras/cAMP/PKA pathway, to determine the
effects that the modulation of these feedback mechanisms has on the
establishment of stable oscillatory regimes. In particular, we start by
studying the role of phosphodiesterases, the enzymes that catalyze the
degradation of cAMP, which represent the major negative feedback in this
pathway. Then, we show the results on cAMP oscillations when perturbing the
amount of protein Cdc25 coupled with the alteration of the intracellular ratio
of the guanine nucleotides (GTP/GDP), which are known to regulate the switch
of the GTPase Ras protein. This multi-level regulation of the amplitude and
frequency of oscillations in the Ras/cAMP/PKA pathway might act as a fine
tuning mechanism for the downstream targets of PKA, as also recently evidenced
by some experimental investigations on the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of the
transcription factor Msn2 in yeast cells.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[BIOMD0000000478](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/BIOMD0000000478) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

